SQL optimizer design document (#17651)
hazelcast/hazelcast: docs/design/sql/09-optimizer.md

```
BEFORE:
RelSet#1 {
    RelSubset#1: [convention=LOGICAL] -> Scan(t)
}

AFTER:
RelSet#1 {
    RelSubset#1: [convention=PHYSICAL] -> Scan(table)
    RelSubset#2: [convention=PHYSICAL, collation={a ASC}] -> IndexScan(table, index(a))
}
```
  
### 2.4 Enforcers  
  
It is possible to enforce a certain trait on the operator. This is done through a `RelOptRule.convert` call. When the 
conversion is requested, the optimizer creates a special `AbstractConverter` operator. When a converter is created, an 
instance of the `AbstractConverter.ExpandConversionRule` is scheduled to expand it. This rule compares the properties 
of original operator, and the requested properties. If the original properties do not satisfy the requested ones, the
relevant `RelTraitDef` is invoked to enforce the required property. The result of the enforcement could be either a 
new operator with the desired property, or `null`, which means that the conversion is not possible.

For example, consider the following MEMO:
```
RelSet#1: [LogicalAgg(a)]
RelSet#2: [LogicalScan]
```    
There could be a rule to produce a non-blocking streaming physical aggregate. Such an aggregate requires the input to be 

> sorted on the group key `a`. Therefore, the rule may enforce the conversion:    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sorted by the group key `a`. Therefore, the rule may enforce the conversion:    
```

collation property, that adds a `LogicalSort` operator on top of the scan:
```
RelSet#1: [LogicalAgg(a)]
RelSet#2: [LogicalScan, AbstractConverter(LogicalScan, a ASC), LogicalSort(LogicalScan, a ASC)]
``` 

### 2.5 Metadata

Many optimization rules and operator cost functions require access to external metadata, such as column cardinality,
column uniqueness, etc. Apache Calcite ships with an extensible framework for metadata management. 

Every type of metadata is represented as a concrete class extending the `MetadataHandler` interface. For every operator
type, a separate method with a predefined name is created in this class.  

Then the metadata class is wired up into the `RelMetadataQuery` class by means of Janino-based code generation. An 
instance of the `RelMetadataQuery` class is passed to the rule invocation and operator cost contexts, thus providing
a centralized access point to all required metadata.

This approach is convenient and extensible, but has several performance problems:
1. Compilation with Janino may take significant time to complete, increasing planning time to seconds on a fresh JVM

> 1. Metadata is not cached at `RelSet`/`RelSubset` levels, and re-calculated on every call. This is not optimal,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Metadata is not cached at `RelSet`/`RelSubset` levels, and is re-calculated on every call. This is not optimal,
```

because metadata calculation typically requires recursive dives into inputs of the operator. 

### 2.6 Execution

The `VolcanoPlanner` employs EXODUS-like approach to query optimization. It uses rules to find alternative plans. However, it 

> doesn't employ the guided top-down search strategy. Instead, the optimizer organizes rule instances in a queue, and fire them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
doesn't employ the guided top-down search strategy. Instead, the optimizer organizes rule instances in a queue, and fires them
```

until the queue is empty. The word `Volcano` in the name is misleading, because the optimizer doesn't actually follow the 
main ideas from the Volcano/Cascades papers.

First, an instance of the `VolcanoPlanner` is created and initialized with:
1. The operator tree to be optimized (`RelNode`)
1. The list of rules to use (`RelOptRule`)
1. The list of property types that will be considered during optimization (`RelTraitDef`)
1. The desired properties of the result

Then the optimization process is started through a call to the `VolcanoOptimizer.findBestExp` method. The result is the 
optimized operator tree (`RelNode`) with the desired properties, or an exception if the desired properties cannot be 
satisfied through the given set of rules.

The optimization process is split into three main phases:
1. Copy-in
2. Optimization
3. Copy-out

#### 2.6.1 Copy-in Phase

The goal of the **copy-in** phase is to prepare the initial MEMO and rule instance queue. For every operator the following steps 
are performed:
1. A copy of the operator is created using `RelNode.copy` method, with inputs replaced with the relevant `RelSubset` instances

> 1. An operator is added to the relevant `RelSet` and `RelSubset` instances based on an operator's signature (`RelNode.explain`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. An operator is added to the relevant `RelSet` and `RelSubset` instances based on the operator's signature (`RelNode.explain`)
```

1. A cost of the operator is calculated and set as the `best` cost of the current `RelSubset`
1. For every rule that matches the given operator a rule instance (`VolcanoRuleMatch`) is added to the rule queue 
(`VolcanoPlanner.ruleQueue`) 

The copy-in is performed via `VolcanoPlanner.setRoot` method.

#### 2.6.2 Optimization Phase

The optimization phase proceeds as follows. The next rule instance is taken from the queue and executed. For every new 
operator created during rule invocation:
1. Add the operator to MEMO
1. Update the cost of the operator's `RelSubset` and parents, if needed
1. Schedule new rule instances for the operator and parents, if needed

The process continues until the queue is empty.

#### 2.6.3 Copy-out Phase

Once the optimization is finished, it is necessary to produce the resulting plan from the MEMO. To do this, a recursive 
top-bottom dive from the top `RelSubset` is performed. All `RelSubset` instances already have a node with the best cost at 
this point (aka "winner"). To construct the final plan, the optimizer recursively finds winners bottom-up.

## 3 Hazelcast Mustang Optimizer

> We now discuss how the query optimization is organized in the Hazelcast Mustang. The process is split into the following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now discuss how the query optimization is organized in Hazelcast Mustang. The process is split into the following
```

### 3.2 Validation

The parse tree is validated for semantic correctness. Tables and columns are resolved, return types of every SQL operator is 
calculated. Since Apache Calcite supports more features than we do, we additionally apply the visitor that attempts to 
find unsupported operators. When found, an exception is thrown with the precise position in the original query string.

Once the `SqlNode` is validated, it is converted to the tree of abstract relational operators (`RelNode`), all with the
`Convention.NONE`.

We use Calcite's `SqlValidator` and `SqlToRelConverter` with custom extensions for validation and conversion respectively.   

### 3.3 Rewrite

The initial `RelNode` may contain subqueries that are difficult to deal with. Generally, every subquery (correlated or not) 
could be replaced with a sequence of join and aggregate operators [[4]]. We use Apache Calcite built-in classes to eliminate
subqueries (`SubQueryRemoveRule`, `SqlToRelConverter.decorrelate`). 

After the subqueries are eliminated, unused fields may remain in the plan. We use `SqlToRelConverter.trimUnusedFields`
method to find and remove the unused fields, thus making the plan more efficient.

> The result of this stage is the optimized operator tree (`RelNode`) without subqueries and unused fields.

Reviewer: Is it optimized? No optimization is performed yet.
```suggestion
The result of this stage is an operator tree (`RelNode`) without subqueries and unused fields.
```

### 3.4 Logical Optimization

Further optimization is split into two independent phases - logical and physical.

The logical optimization is concerned with transformations to the operator tree, that simplifies the plan, without 
considering their physical implementations. Generally, we do the following:
- Fuse operators together to make the tree smaller
- Removing operators that have no impact on the final result
- Removing operators that do not produce any results
  
In other optimizers, most of these rules are typically part of the rewrite phase, where the heuristic planning is used instead
of that cost-based optimization. In Apache Calcite, the `HepPlanner` could be used for this. However, some rules may trigger 
conflicting actions, causing the heuristic planner to fail. An example is filter "move around" rules: often it is important
not only to push the filter down, but also to try to push it up, because it may enable further optimizations of the parent node
(such as transitive predicate push, partition pruning, etc). The heuristic planner may fail to find these alternatives. 

> Therefore, we use the cost-based `VolcanoPlanner` as slower, but safer choice. We may reconsider this in the future, and move 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, we use the cost-based `VolcanoPlanner` as a slower, but safer choice. We may reconsider this in the future, and move 
```

| `LogicalFilter` | Filter rows of the input based on the provided condition |

*Table 4: Logical Rules*

| Name | Product | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `FilterMergeRule` | Calcite | Merges two adjacent `LogicalFilter` into one to make the operator tree simpler |
| `FilterProjectTransposeRule` | Calcite | Moves `LogicalFilter` past `LogicalProject` (aka "filter pushdown") to allow for further optimizations, such as `FilterIntoScanLogicalRule` |
| `FilterIntoScanLogicalRule` | Hazelcast | Moves a `LogicalFilter` in the table of the `LogicalScan` to make the operator tree simpler |
| `ProjectMergeRule` | Calcite | Merges two adjacent `LogicalProject` into one to make the operator tree simpler |
| `ProjectFilterTransposeRule` | Calcite | Moves `LogicalProject` past `LogicalFilter` to allow for further optimizations, such as `ProjectIntoScanLogicalRule` |
| `ProjectIntoScanLogicalRule` | Hazelcast | Gets the list of required input fields from the `LogicalProject` and ensures that the child `LogicalScan` doesn't return unused fields |
| `ProjectRemoveRule` | Calcite | Removes a `LogicalProject` if it doesn't do anything, e.g. `SELECT a, b FROM (SELECT a, b FROM table)` |

> | `PruneEmptyRules` | Calcite | Removes `LogicalProject` and `LogicalProject` if their input is known to be empty, e.g. `SELECT a, b FROM table WHERE 1 != 1` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `PruneEmptyRules` | Calcite | Removes `LogicalProject` and `LogicalFilter` if their input is known to be empty, e.g. `SELECT a, b FROM table WHERE 1 != 1` |
```

Execution of these rules might create many hundreds and thousands of alternative plans. If we add physical optimization

> to this step, it could easily blow the search space, because the EXODUS-like search algorithm do not allow for search

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to this step, it could easily blow up the search space, because the EXODUS-like search algorithm does not allow for search
```

space pruning, and requires re-execution of the same rules multiple times to guarantee that the optimal plan is found.

Consider that we produced `N` different logical plans, and have physical rules that may produce `M` alternatives 
for every logical plan. As a result, we will have to consider `N * M` plans. Instead, we perform the logical 
optimization in a separate step, extract only one best plan from the search space, and then apply the physical rules
to on the next stage. This way, we have to consider only `N + M` plans, that alleviates the inefficiency of the core
search algorithm of `VolcanoPlanner`.

> The fundamental observation, is that splitting optimization into several phases doesn't guarantee the optimal plan 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fundamental observation is that splitting optimization into several phases doesn't guarantee the optimal plan 
```

in the general case. That is, if we generated plans `P1, P2 ... Pm ...`, and picked `Pm` as the best one, it
doesn't mean that applying additional rules to `Pm` will produce the optimal plan `Pm'`. Another plan `Pn`, 
such that `cost(Pn) > cost(Pm)`, could yield better plan `Pn'`, such that `cost(Pn') < cost(Pm')`.

Therefore, the logical phase should generally include rules, that produce plans that are generally the best starting
points for the subsequent physical optimization with high probability. Operator fusion, removal of unused operators, scan 

> field trimming, and filter pushdowns produces better plans in almost all cases, this is why we execute them at this 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
field trimming, and filter pushdowns produce better plans in almost all cases, this is why we execute them at this 
```

thrown in this case.

*Table 5: Logical Conversion Rules*

| Name | From (Calcite) | To (Hazelcast) |
|---|---|---|
| `MapScanLogicalRule` | `LogicalTableScan` | `MapScanLogicalRel` |
| `FilterLogicalRule` | `LogicalFilter` | `FilterPhysicalRel` |
| `ProjectLogicalRule` | `LogicalProject` | `ProjectLogicalRel` |
| `ValuesLogicalRule` | `LogicalValues` | `ValuesLogicalRel` |

Last, we manually add a special `RootLogicalRel` on top of the result. This operator is an abstraction of a user query
cursor that returns results on the initiator member. 

The result of the logical optimization is an optimized tree of operators with the `HazelcastConvention.LOGICAL` convention, 
that has `RootLogicalRel` at the root.

### 3.5 Physical Optimization

The goal of the physical optimization is to find the physical implementations of logical operators. Some physical operators
have 1-to-1 mapping to their logical counterparts (e.g. project), while others may have completely different implementations 
(e.g. index scan created out of logical table scan). 

#### 3.5.1 Distribution Trait

> Since Hazelcast stores data on multiple nodes, we should take the data distribution in count during planning. This is achieved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Hazelcast stores data on multiple nodes, we should take the data distribution into account during planning. This is achieved
```

through the `DistributionTrait` property that is assigned to physical operators during planning.   

*Table 6: Distribution Types*

| Name | Description |
|---|---|
| `ROOT` | The result set is located on the initiator member only |

> | `PARTITIONED` | The result set is distributed across member, every row is located on one member only |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `PARTITIONED` | The result set is distributed across members, every row is located on one member only |
```

| `REPLICATED` | The whole result set is located on every member |

When the optimization starts, we request the `ROOT` distribution from the planner. This literally means "deliver the final 
result to the initiator member". 

The `DistributionTraitDef` defines what should happen if a parent member requests a certain distribution that cannot
be satisfied by the child. If the data movement is needed, a special `Exchange` operator is injected between the 
parent and the child. The goal of the `Exchange` operator is to move data between members to get the desired distribution.

> Therefore, the `Exchange` operator is the enforcer operator for the `DistributionTrait`, similarly to `Sort` that is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the `Exchange` operator is the enforcer operator for the `DistributionTrait`, similarly to how `Sort` is the
```

enforcer operator for the `RelCollation`.

Currently, we support only `RootExchangePhysicalRel` that delivers results to the initiator node. Implementation of joins,
aggregations, and sorting will require specialized implementations of the `Exchange` operator. 

The table below summarizes how the ROOT distribution is enforced.

*Table 7: Root Distribution Enforcers*
| Input Distribution | Result |
|---|---|
| `ROOT` | No-op, the child operator is already located on the initiator |
| `PARTITIONED` | No-op, if there is only one member in the topology. Otherwise, inject `RootExchangePhysicalRel` on top of the child |
| `REPLICATED` | No-op, the child operator is already located on all members, including the initiator |

> Below is the example of the distribution enforcement for the simple logical plan:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is the example of the distribution enforcement for a simple logical plan:
```

parent distributions are resolved. The process continues until we reach the root node, that always has `ROOT` distribution. 
Then the root node enforces the `ROOT` distribution on the input, adding the `RootExchangePhysicalRel` if needed.

*Table 8: Initial Distributions of the Leaf Nodes*

| Node | Distribution | Comment |
|---|---|---|
| `MapScanLogicalRel` | `PARTITIONED` | Scan of the partitioned `IMap` |
| `ValuesLogicalRel` | `REPLICATED` | Constant values, that are delivered to all members as a part of the plan |
  
The `VolcanoPlanner` is not suitable to work in the bottom-up trait propagation out-of-the-box. Therefore, we adjust our 
integration with the Apache Calcite as follows:
1. During the physical optimization, we gradually convert nodes from the `LOGICAL` convention to `PHYSICAL`. For the 
`PHYSICAL` convention we override a couple of methods (see `HazelcastConventions.PHYSICAL`) that roughly forces the optimizer
to do the following: when a new `PHYSICAL` node is created, force re-optimization of the `LOGICAL` parent. This way, whenever a 
new `PHYSICAL` node is added to MEMO, the rules for the `LOGICAL` parent node is added to the execution queue. 

> 1. Optimization rules for the intermediate nodes (i.e. not leaves, and not root) follow the similar pattern: get the input's 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Optimization rules for intermediate nodes (i.e. not leaves, and not root) follow a similar pattern: get the input's 
```

`RelSet`, extract all `RelSubset`-s with `PHYSICAL` convention, and create one intermediate physical node per `RelSubset`. This

> way we ensure that all possibly interesting properties of the current group is propagated to parent groups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
way we ensure that all possibly interesting properties of the current group are propagated to parent groups.
```

| `MapScanPhysicalRule` | `MapScanPhysicalRel`, `MapIndexScanPhysicalRel` | Convert logical map scan to physical map scan or physical map index scan based on the filter condition, assign `PARTITIONED` distribution |

The result of the physical optimization is an optimized tree of operators with the `HazelcastConvention.PHYSICAL` convention, 
that has `RootPhysicalRel` at the root, and has zero or more `Exchange` operators that move data within the cluster.

### 3.6 Splitting

Finally, we split the physical plan into one or more fragments, using `Exchange` operators as fragment boundaries:
1. Every node is converted to the `PlanNode` counterpart, that could be serialized and sent over network
1. Every `Exchange` node is converted into a pair of `send` and `receive` plan nodes (actual implementation depends on the 
exchange type)

Consider the following physical plan:
```
RootPhysicalRel[ROOT]               // Return to the user from the initiator
  RootExchangePhysicalRel[ROOT]     // Send to the initiator
    MapScanPhysicalRel[PARTITIONED] // Scan an IMap on all nodes
```

> After the split it is converted into the plan with two fragments:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the split it is converted into a plan with two fragments:
```

```
FRAGMENT 1:
RootPlanNode                       // Return to the user from the initiator
  ReceivePlanNode[edge=1]          // Receive results from all members

FRAGMENT 2:
RootSendPlanNode[edge=1]           // Send results to the initiator
  MapScanLogicalRel[PARTITIONED]   // Scan an IMap locally
```

The split logic is located in the `PlanCreateVisitor` class. The result is the `Plan` object, that doesn't depend

> on the Apache Calcite, and could be sent to other nodes for execution. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on Apache Calcite, and can be sent to other nodes for execution. 
```
